---
icon: fluent:target-24-regular
---

# Handler
> Intro to route handlers

A handler is a function that recieves a [Context](/api/context) object and return a response.

## Define a handler
As you see previously, handler is just a function that returns [anything](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response/Response#body)
that is supported by the [Response](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response) constructor.
```ts
app.get('/', () => 'Hi');
```

The handler can access the [Context] object, which contains the original request object and response options.
```ts
app.get('/', (c) => {
  // Log request headers
  console.log(c.req.headers);

  // Set status code. Default value is 200
  c.status = 201;

  // This property is not set by default as it's not frequently used
  c.statusText = 'Hi';

  // Add a header pair
  c.headers.push(['Server', 'Mapl']);
});
```

### Why store headers in an array instead of an object?
The first issue with response headers being an object is that you can't have multiple header values.
This makes registering multiple values slower since you need to append the header into a [Headers](//developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers) object
after the [Response](//developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response) object is initialized.

The second issue is how JS engines optimize property access. They create an internal structure for common property access,
which leads to more memory being used compared to arrays.

Then why not used a [Headers](//developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers) object directly?
[Headers](//developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Headers) object initializes slower and appends much slower than arrays and objects, as it has to do additional
checks to see if the header pair is valid **on insert**.

## Other types of handlers
Mapl includes other common type of handlers to send different form of data.

### HTML handlers
Return HTML directly without appending headers.
```ts
app.get('/page/*', {
  type: 'html',
  fn: (c) => `<p>${c.params[0]}</p>`
});
```

This is in fact faster than writing it using normal handlers (try to see it yourself :]).

### JSON handlers
Return JSON directly without appending headers.
```ts
app.get('/info/*', {
  type: 'json',
  fn: (c) => ({
    name: c.params[0],
    id: Math.random()
  })
});
```

This is also faster than writing it using normal handlers, as it uses the same optimization as HTML handlers.

### Static handler
Cache and return static content.
```ts
app.get('/', {
  type: 'static',

  body: 'Hi', // Response body (optional)
  options: { status: 200 } // Response options (optional)
});
```

This handler get cached under the hood to not recreate unnecessary stuff on every request.
